docs: clarify AUTO_RANDOM_BASE usage and explicit insert behavior (#20734)
pingcap/docs: auto-random.md

## Clear the auto-increment ID cache

When you insert explicit values into an `AUTO_RANDOM` column in a multi-instance TiDB deployment, ID collisions might occur, similar to an `AUTO_INCREMENT` column. Errors occur when the explicitly inserted ID conflicts with the internal counter that TiDB uses for automatic ID generation. 

> The collision happens as follows: each `AUTO_RANDOM` ID contains an auto-incrementing part alongside random bits. TiDB uses an internal counter for this auto-incrementing part. If you explicitly insert an ID where the auto-incrementing part matches the counter's next value, a duplicate key error might occur when TiDB later attempts to generate the same ID automatically. For more details, see [AUTO_INCREMENT Uniqueness](/auto-increment.md#uniqueness).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The collision happens as follows: each `AUTO_RANDOM` ID consists of random bits and an auto-incrementing part. TiDB uses an internal counter for this auto-incrementing part. If you explicitly insert an ID where the auto-incrementing part matches the counter's next value, a duplicate key error might occur when TiDB later attempts to generate the same ID automatically. For more details, see [AUTO_INCREMENT Uniqueness](/auto-increment.md#uniqueness).
```

Author: Thanks! Applied this suggestion in commit [89585ab4](https://github.com/pingcap/docs/commit/89585ab43).

In a single TiDB instance, this issue does not occur because the node automatically adjusts its internal counter when processing explicit insertions, preventing any future collisions. However, in a multi-instance TiDB deployment, each node maintains its own cache of IDs, which needs to be cleared after explicit insertions to prevent collisions. You can clear the unallocated cached IDs and avoid collisions using one of the following options.

### Option 1: Automatically rebase (Recommended)

```sql
ALTER TABLE t AUTO_RANDOM_BASE=0;
```

> This statement automatically determines an appropriate base value. Although it produces a warning message similar to `Can't reset AUTO_INCREMENT to 0 without FORCE option, using XXX instead`, the value **will** change and you can safely ignore this warning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This statement automatically determines an appropriate base value. Although it produces a warning message similar to `Can't reset AUTO_INCREMENT to 0 without FORCE option, using XXX instead`, the base value **will** change and you can safely ignore this warning.
```

> **Note:**
>
> You cannot set `AUTO_RANDOM_BASE` to `0` with the `FORCE` keyword. Attempting this results in an error.

### Option 2: Manually set a specific base value

If you need to set a specific base value (for example, `1000`), use the `FORCE` keyword:

```sql
ALTER TABLE t FORCE AUTO_RANDOM_BASE = 1000;
```

> This approach is less convenient because it requires you to determine an appropriate value yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach is less convenient because it requires you to determine an appropriate base value yourself.
```

Author: Thanks! Applied this suggestion in commit [89585ab4](https://github.com/pingcap/docs/commit/89585ab43).

> **Note:**
>

> > You must use a non-zero positive integer value when using `FORCE`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> When using `FORCE`, you must specify a non-zero positive integer.

Author: Thanks! Applied this suggestion in commit [89585ab4](https://github.com/pingcap/docs/commit/89585ab43).

Author: Thanks! Applied this suggestion in commit [89585ab4](https://github.com/pingcap/docs/commit/89585ab43).

> > * When using `FORCE`, you must specify a non-zero positive integer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> When using `FORCE`, you must specify a non-zero positive integer.
```

## Clear the auto-increment ID cache

When you insert data with explicit values into an `AUTO_RANDOM` column, it works similarly to an `AUTO_INCREMENT` column regarding potential ID collisions. If explicit inserts happen to use ID values that conflict with the internal counter TiDB uses for automatic generation, this can lead to errors.

> Here's how the collision can happen: each `AUTO_RANDOM` ID contains an auto-incrementing part alongside random bits. TiDB uses an internal counter for this auto-incrementing part. If you explicitly insert an ID where this part matches the counter's next value, TiDB might later try to generate the same ID automatically, leading to a duplicate key error.

Reviewer 3: If there is only one TiDB, the collision will not happen because it will rebase for the explicit insertion.

See https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/auto-increment/#uniqueness

Author: Thanks for pointing that out. I've mentioned "in a deployment with multiple TiDB server instances" and also added a clear explanation about how single TiDB instances handle this differently: "With a single TiDB instance, this issue doesn't occur because the node automatically adjusts its internal counter when processing explicit insertions, preventing any future collisions."
I've also incorporated the link to the uniqueness documentation you shared. This should help users understand when they need to worry about this issue.

Although `AUTO_RANDOM` doesn't keep track of a single specific "next ID" like `AUTO_INCREMENT` does, frequent explicit inserts that cause such conflicts might still require you to adjust the starting point (`AUTO_RANDOM_BASE`) for the auto-incrementing part of future automatically generated IDs to avoid these potential errors.

> To change the base value (`AUTO_RANDOM_BASE`) used for the auto-increment part of future ID generations on an existing table, you must use the `FORCE` keyword.

Reviewer 3: The purpose of this part ("Clear the auto-increment ID cache") is not about setting `AUTO_RANDOM_BASE` to a specific value. The purpose is to clear the unallocated cached IDs to avoid potential collision. There are two ways:
- Set `AUTO_RANDOM_BASE` to a value with `FORCE` keyword (I don't recommend, because it requires user to get the minimum ID value from the table, which is cumbersome).
- Rebase `AUTO_RANDOM_BASE` automatically (`ALTER TABLE t AUTO_RANDOM_BASE=0;`).

Author: Thank you for clarifying the purpose of this section! I've completely restructured it to focus on clearing unallocated cached IDs rather than just setting a specific value. I've presented both approaches with the automatic rebasing method as the recommended option, and explained the manual approach as an alternative. The documentation now clearly states the purpose is to avoid potential collisions in multi-node deployments.

> **Note:**
>

> > * If you try to alter `AUTO_RANDOM_BASE` without the `FORCE` keyword, the value will not change. The command completes, but the base value stays unchanged. A subsequent `SHOW WARNINGS` reveals the specific warning `Can't reset AUTO_INCREMENT to 0 without FORCE option, using 1 instead`.

Reviewer 3: > If you try to alter `AUTO_RANDOM_BASE` without the `FORCE` keyword,

the value WILL ~not~ change even if the warning is reported. We should suggest ignoring the warning instead of using `FORCE` (see my comment above)

Author: @tangenta I appreciate this critical correction. I've updated the documentation to clearly state that when using `AUTO_RANDOM_BASE=0` without the `FORCE` keyword, "the value will change and you can safely ignore this warning." This is an important distinction that users need to know.
The warning message itself (`Can't reset AUTO_INCREMENT to 0 without FORCE option, using XXX instead`) is a bit misleading since it mentions `AUTO_INCREMENT` instead of `AUTO_RANDOM` and suggests the change isn't happening when it actually is. Would updating this warning message be something to consider for a future release?

Author: Suggestion just in case you are considering updating the warning message: "AUTO_RANDOM_BASE has been updated to XXX. You specified '0' which triggered automatic rebasing to prevent ID collisions."

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/60616
